IT WAS JUST-- EVERYTHING
CAME DOWN ON HER.
Narrator:
A TEEN, A STUDENT,
A PARENT.
CHILDREN HAVING CHILDREN
NEED OUR HELP.
Woman:
LABOR AND DELIVERY IS PROBABLY
ONE DAY IN THEIR LIVES,
BUT PARENTING IS FOR
THE REST OF THEIR LIVES.
Narrator:
TODAY, A NEW CONCEPT
IN SUPPORT
FOR TEEN PARENTS
AND WHAT THE SCHOOLS
THEMSELVES CAN DO.
Brazelton:
IT TAKES A LOT OF GUTS TO GO
BACK TO YOUR FAMILY AND SAY,
"I NEED YOU RIGHT NOW."
- Narrator:
"BRAZELTON"...
- SHE NEEDS YOU RIGHT NOW.
Narrator:
"ON PARENTING."
RIGHT NOW OVER A THOUSAND
TEENAGED GIRLS
FIND THEMSELVES PREGNANT
EVERY DAY IN THIS COUNTRY.
THAT'S AN AMAZING STATISTIC.
AND WE'VE FOUND
THAT TWO THINGS
DETERMINE WHETHER OR NOT
A TEEN MOTHER
WILL BE SUCCESSFUL
IN RAISING HER CHILD:
FIRST, THE SUPPORT
OF HER OWN FAMILY,
AND SECOND, THE SUPPORT
OF HER LARGER FAMILY
OF SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY.
TODAY WE'RE GOING TO LOOK
AT AN EXCITING NEW APPROACH
TO PROVIDING
THAT SUPPORT
AND VISIT WITH SOME
EXTRAORDINARY YOUNG WOMEN
COMMITTED TO BEING
THE BEST PARENTS THEY CAN BE
FOR THEIR BABIES.
Brazelton:
LAWRENCE, MASSACHUSETTS,
- ONE OF AMERICA'S
OLD INDUSTRIAL CITIES,
- ( bell tolling )
ONE THAT,
AT FIRST GLANCE,
TIME AND TECHNOLOGY
SEEM TO HAVE PASSED BY.
BUT LAWRENCE IS ACTUALLY
HOME TO A REVOLUTION
IN THE TECHNOLOGY
OF THE HUMAN HEART.
YOU SEE, A COALITION
OF COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS
HAVE COME TOGETHER
IN A LEADING-EDGE APPROACH
TO HELPING
TEEN FAMILIES.
( siren wailing )
IT ALL STARTS
WITH SOME SIMPLE TRUTHS.
Millie Robinson:
ONCE YOU HAVE A CHILD,
THERE'S THIS IDEA
THAT YOU AUTOMATICALLY
ARE BLESSED
WITH ALL THIS PARENTING
KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS
AND UNDERSTANDING OF THAT,
AND NONE OF THAT
IS TRUE.
ONCE A 16-YEAR-OLD
HAS A CHILD,
SHE DOESN'T TURN INTO
THE MOTHER OF THE CENTURY.
WHAT SHE TURNS INTO
IS A TEEN MOM.
SHE STILL HAS ALL THOSE
ADOLESCENT CONCERNS AND ALL
THOSE ADOLESCENT NEEDS,
AND NOW WHAT SHE HAS IS
A CHILD IN ADDITION TO THAT.
Brazelton:
EACH TEEN PARENT
IS UNIQUE,
AND SO ARE HER NEEDS.
Sharon Thompson:
SOME OF THE GIRLS LIVE
WITH THEIR BOYFRIENDS.
SOME ARE MARRIED.
SOME LIVE WITH THEIR FAMILIES.
SOME ARE IN
VERY GOOD SITUATIONS.
NOT SO GOOD SITUATIONS.
SO WE TRY AND GET TO KNOW
EACH OF THEM
AND WHAT THEIR ISSUES
OR CONCERNS ARE
AND WORK OUT A PLAN
TO WORK WITH THEM.
Brazelton:
JENNIFER'S STORY IS TYPICAL.
Jennifer Gaznek:
WHEN I WAS 15,
I GOT PREGNANT WITH HER.
YOU KNOW, I WAS 15,
BUT I KNEW I WAS READY.
HER FATHER AND I
ARE FRIENDS.
YOU KNOW, WE GET ALONG,
AND CHIARA
VISITS WITH HIM,
YOU KNOW,
A FEW TIMES A WEEK.
Brazelton:
JENNIFER'S LUCKY.
FROM THE BEGINNING,
SHE'S HAD THE SUPPORT
OF HER PARENTS,
A KEY ELEMENT
TO MAKING IT WORK.
Donna Gaznek:
I FELT THAT SHE WAS
A CHILD HAVING A CHILD,
BUT I LEFT
THE DECISION UP TO JENNIFER
AND I BASICALLY SAID,
"LISTEN, YOU'RE PREGNANT
WITH THIS BABY,
AND LET'S GO FORWARD."
I DIDN'T WANT HER
TO HAVE THE BABY ABORTED.
SHE DIDN'T WANT TO DO IT,
AND I DIDN'T WANT
HER TO DO ANYTHING
SHE DIDN'T WANT TO DO.
I SUPPORTED HER AND SAID,
"WE'LL GET THROUGH IT."
Brazelton:
MANY GIRLS CAN'T LIVE AT HOME.
MAYBE IT'S THE COLOR.
YOU WANT PURPLE?
Brazelton:
ANOTHER COMMUNITY PROGRAM
ACTUALLY PROVIDES HOUSING,
EITHER IN APARTMENTS
OR GROUP HOMES.
Robinson:
WE PROVIDE A SAFE
AND SECURE ENVIRONMENT
FOR THESE GIRLS
WHERE THEY CAN RELAX
AND REALLY LEARN AND GROW
AND NURTURE THEIR CHILDREN
IN A VERY HEALTHY,
SAFE ENVIRONMENT.
Brazelton:
THE PROGRAM IS MORE THAN
JUST A PLACE TO STAY.
Robinson: A LOT OF
WHAT WE DO IS HELP GIRLS
TO FILL OUT APPLICATIONS
AND KNOW THE PROCESS,
HOW TO ADVOCATE FOR YOURSELF.
IF YOU GET A PHONE BILL
THAT'S INCORRECT,
HOW DO YOU GO ABOUT
STRAIGHTENING THAT OUT?
YOU DON'T JUST NOT PAY
THE BILL BECAUSE YOU'RE MAD
AT THE PHONE COMPANY--
YOU KNOW, THOSE KINDS
OF THINGS.
Brazelton:
WHATEVER THE INDIVIDUAL
PROGRAM,
THERE ARE COMMON GOALS
FOR THE TEENS.
WE STARTED THE PROGRAM
TO SEE THAT THE GIRLS
COULD GRADUATE
FROM HIGH SCHOOL.
ALSO, AT THE SAME TIME,
WE TRY AND PREVENT
A SECOND PREGNANCY
BECAUSE WE FEEL,
WITH ONE CHILD,
IT'S DIFFICULT
BUT DOABLE.
AND ALTHOUGH
IT'S NOT IMPOSSIBLE
TO BE SUCCESSFUL
WITH TWO CHILDREN,
IT MAKES IT MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT TO DO THAT.
YOU TIRED?
Thompson:
WE LOOK AT THE GIRLS
AND THE CHILDREN
AS HAVING
TREMENDOUS POTENTIAL,
AND WE WANT
TO WORK WITH THEM
TO GIVE THEM THE SUPPORT
THAT THEY NEED
TO BE SUCCESSFUL
IN WHATEVER THEY CHOOSE.
Brazelton:
AN IMPORTANT PART
OF EACH PROGRAM
IS QUALITY CHILDCARE.
Jennifer:
I HATE LEAVING HER
IN THE MORNING
'CAUSE SHE CRIES
FOR AWHILE.
- CALL IF YOU NEED TO.
- ( Chiara crying )
- CALL ME IF
THERE'S ANY PROBLEMS.
- I'M SURE SHE'LL BE FINE.
( laughing )
Brazelton:
PARENTING CLASSES
AND COUNSELING
ARE ALSO CRITICAL.
Jenny Delbrey:
THESE GIRLS LEARN PARENTING
IN MANY DIFFERENT WAYS,
AND THAT'S WHERE OUR ROLE
IS VERY IMPORTANT,
ESPECIALLY
THE SCHOOL SYSTEM.
OUR SYSTEM, FOR EXAMPLE,
WE MEET WITH THE TEEN PARENTS
ONCE A WEEK AND PROVIDE
PARENTING CLASSES.
SOMETIMES I HAVE
A CURRICULUM.
SOMETIMES MY GROUP TAKES
A TOTALLY DIFFERENT ROLE
AND TURN
BECAUSE THEY JUST WANT
TO SPEAK THEIR MIND.
...HANDLING ANGER,
AND SO...
Brazelton:
THESE GIRLS NEED TO FEEL
THAT THEY CAN SUCCEED.
SOMETIMES, DURING
GROUP MEETING,
I USE MY PERSONAL LIFE
AS AN EXAMPLE AND SAY,
"I DO KNOW WHAT
YOU'RE GOING THROUGH
AND I KNOW WHAT YOU'RE FACING
BECAUSE I WAS
A TEEN PARENT."
Brazelton:
PROVIDING THE SUPPORT
TEEN PARENTS NEED
SO THEY CAN MAKE IT
ON THEIR OWN.
...YOU KNOW,
WITH A BOOK...
Brazelton:
ONE COMMUNITY'S GIFT
TO ALL OF US.
Delbrey:
THESE TEENAGERS ARE
REALLY SUCCESSFUL
AND THEY'RE MAKING IT
BECAUSE THEY LOVE
THEIR CHILDREN.
THEY'RE REALLY
KIND OF AMAZING.
THEY'RE STUDENTS
IN SCHOOL.
THEY ARE RAISING
CHILDREN,
AND THEY'RE DOING
A GREAT JOB.
THE KIDS ARE
INCREDIBLE CHILDREN,
AND THEY LOVE
THEM DEARLY.
THEY'RE INCREDIBLE PEOPLE
WHO DO A LOT OF THINGS,
AND IT KIND OF AMAZES ME
ALL THE TIME.
Brazelton:
NEXT, THE STORY
OF A HIGH SCHOOL
THAT SPECIALIZES
IN TEEN PARENTS.
WITH US TODAY IS
CRYSTAL HOLMES,
OUR INTERNET EXPERT
FROM IBM.
WHAT RESOURCES
ARE THERE FOR PARENTS
WHO HAPPEN TO BE TEENS
AND WHO ARE GOING THROUGH
THEIR OWN DEVELOPMENT
WHILE THEY'RE TRYING
TO UNDERSTAND THEIR
CHILD'S DEVELOPMENT?
THERE ARE A LOT OF GOOD
RESOURCES ON THE INTERNET
FOR PARENTS OF ANY AGE.
WE'LL GO TO THE AMERICAN
ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS.
ON THIS SITE,
THEY HAVE A WEALTH OF
INFORMATION FOR PARENTS
ON PARTICULAR
HEALTH CARE CONCERNS.
IF YOU'RE A TEENAGE PARENT,
YOU'RE STILL A PARENT.
THERE'S LOTS OF INFORMATION
AVAILABLE ON THE INTERNET
FOR YOU.
HOWEVER, IF YOU'RE HAVING
SPECIFIC CHALLENGES BECAUSE
YOU ARE A TEENAGER,
DON'T HESITATE
TO GET SUPPORT
FROM YOUR LOCAL
FAMILY RESOURCE CENTER
OR FROM A COUNSELOR.
EVERYTHING WE KNOW
ABOUT TEENAGE PARENTING
SHOWS US THAT IF TEENAGERS
HAVE SUPPORT,
THEY CAN DO THE BEST JOB
BY THEIR KIDS
THAT YOU CAN EXPERIENCE.
Brazelton:
FOR MORE RESOURCES
VISIT US ONLINE AT:
ON ON PARENTING,"
PRESENTED BY THE PARENTING
INSTITUTE AT PAMPERS.COM.
Brazelton:
NEW YORK CITY
HAS DEVELOPED
A SPECIAL APPROACH
TO KEEPING ITS TEEN PARENTS
IN SCHOOL--
A NETWORK OF HIGH SCHOOLS
DEVOTED SOLELY TO TEEN PARENTS.
Donald K. Amaker:
WE'RE JUST ONE SCHOOL
IN A PROGRAM THAT CONSISTS
OF FIVE SCHOOLS.
THERE'S A REAL MARKET
FOR SCHOOLS FOR GIRLS
WHO ARE PREGNANT AND GIRLS
WHO ARE PARENTING,
AND WE'RE HERE TO SORT OF
SERVE THEIR PARTICULAR NEED.
Brazelton:
ONSITE CHILDCARE
IS THE FIRST THING
THESE KIDS NEED
TO STAY IN SCHOOL.
SONIA IS
A TYPICAL STUDENT.
Sonia:
IT'S TOUGH HAVING A KID.
IT'S HARD WORK,
A BIG RESPONSIBILITY.
HER FATHER'S
NOT IN THE PICTURE.
I HAVE TO SACRIFICE
FOR MYSELF AND FOR HER.
IN THIS PARTICULAR BUILDING,
WE HAVE THE CAPABILITY
FOR HANDLING ABOUT
20 INFANTS, 20 TODDLERS,
STAFFED BY A GROUP
OF LICENSED
PROFESSIONAL CAREGIVERS.
DID SHE HAVE
A GOOD NIGHT?
Brazelton:
WHILE EVERY COMMUNITY
IN THE COUNTRY DOESN'T HAVE
THE RESOURCES TO CREATE
A SPECIAL SCHOOL,
THE PRINCIPLES YOU'LL SEE
HERE CAN APPLY ANYWHERE.
( indistinct chatter )
IT'S VERY HARD.
RAISING A BABY IS
NO JOKE AT ALL.
BUT I CAN COME AND CHECK
ON HIM WHENEVER I WANT.
THE SCHOOL IS SMALL,
SO IT'S EASY TO KNOW
ALL THE TEACHERS.
Amaker:
IT'S ALSO STAFFED BY WHAT
WE CALL A "LIFE TEACHER"
WHO DOES
A VERY EFFECTIVE JOB
AT TEACHING THE BABIES,
PLAYING WITH THE BABIES,
READING TO THE BABIES,
INTRODUCING THE BABIES
TO THE WHOLE SOCIALIZING
PROCESS.
JORDAN WAS PROUD
OF HIMSELF...
Brazelton:
I BELIEVE THAT EVERY SCHOOL
SYSTEM SHOULD HAVE ONE,
NOT ONLY TO HELP
THE YOUNG MOMS,
BUT FOR CHILD
DEVELOPMENT CLASSES
TO HELP ALL TEENS LEARN
ABOUT BABIES FIRSTHAND.
- YAY, JORDAN!
- CAN YOU CLAP YOUR HAND?
Amaker:
A TYPICAL DAY,
THE GIRLS COME IN,
AND IF THEIR BABIES ARE
INVOLVED IN THE LIFE CENTER,
THEY GET THEIR BABIES
READY FOR THE DAY,
WHICH CONSISTS OF
CHANGING THEIR CLOTHES,
PREPARING THEIR BOTTLES.
Woman:
BYE-BYE!
STASHA, BYE-BYE!
I'LL SEE YOU LATER.
- BYE!
- MISS JONES,
I'M LEAVING.
- YEAH.
- Jones: ...REPORT
AND SIGNED IN?
OKAY, WE'LL SEE
YOU LATER.
BYE.
Brazelton:
ONCE THE SCHOOL
DAY BEGINS,
THE TEENS ARE EXPECTED
TO PERFORM JUST LIKE
ANY OTHER STUDENT.
Man:
A BOOK CALLED
"A MEDIEVAL HOME COMPANION:
A GUIDEBOOK FOR WOMEN."
Girl:
"ALL THE SPECIAL PLEASURES,
GREATEST DESIRES
AND PERFECT JOYS
ARE IN PLEASING
AND OBEYING EACH OTHER."
HERE, HE'S TELLING US
TO LOOK TO NATURE
TO DESCRIBE
THE PROPER...
Brazelton:
THIS IS NOT
A SECOND-CLASS EDUCATION.
ONE OF THE THINGS I LIKE
ABOUT THE SCIENTIFIC NOTATION
IS IT KEEPS
YOU FROM WRITING
ALL THE EXCESS ZEROES
AND THE EXCESS NUMBERS.
( laughter, chatter )
Teacher:
IT'S RIGHT FOR THE...
Brazelton:
THESE TEENS DO HAVE
SPECIAL ISSUES
WHICH EVERY HIGH SCHOOL
SHOULD TRY TO UNDERSTAND
AND SUPPORT.
INDIVIDUAL AND GROUP
COUNSELING
IS SCHEDULED
FOR EVERY STUDENT.
WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT WHAT HAPPENED WHEN
YOU TOLD YOUR MOTHER...
Brazelton:
THESE KIDS HAVE GONE
THROUGH A LOT.
...OR THE BABY'S FATHER
- THAT YOU ARE PREGNANT.
WHAT WAS THAT LIKE?
- Brazelton: JUST LISTEN.
I WAS TERRIFIED
TO TELL MY MOTHER.
I DIDN'T TELL HER.
I FOUND OUT WHEN I WAS THREE
MONTHS THAT I WAS PREGNANT,
AND I DIDN'T TELL HER.
I TOLD HER
INTO MY FIFTH MONTH.
SHE WAS LIKE, "YOU
CAN'T STAY HERE ANYMORE.
I'M GOING TO DISOWN YOU."
BUT SHE GOT OVER THAT.
IT'S LIKE SHE'S HAPPY NOW.
MAYBE SHE WAS MAD BECAUSE
I WAS STILL IN SCHOOL.
THAT'S WHAT SHE WANTED ME
TO DO-- TO FINISH SCHOOL.
I DIDN'T SHOW AT ALL.
I STARTED SHOWING
ONCE I TOLD HER.
I THOUGHT THAT
MY KID WAS HIDING,
LIKE FEARING--
THE FEAR I FELT,
I FELT IT FELT THE FEAR.
I HAD A FEAR OF TELLING
MY BOYFRIEND'S MOTHER,
WHO WE KEPT IT FROM
FOR AWHILE.
WE DIDN'T WANT TO TELL HER,
BUT SHE SAID SHE FIGURED IT
OUT BY HERSELF
BECAUSE MY EATING
HABITS CHANGED.
SO EVERYBODY KNOWS NOW.
HE TOOK IT COOL.
HE WAS LIKE, "I'M GOING
TO BE A GRANDFATHER.
OH, MY GOD, AT 33,
I'M GOING TO BE
A GRANDFATHER!"
- HOW ARE YOU ALL GOING TO
TAKE CARE OF THIS CHILD?
- WE GOT TO GET A JOB.
Brazelton:
THE SCHOOL HAS TRAINED
SENSITIVE TEACHERS,
PEOPLE THE GIRLS
CAN TRUST.
- HE'S HAPPY.
- OKAY, IS HE MAKING
ANY PREPARATIONS
- TO SUPPORT THE CHILD
AND YOU FINANCIALLY?
- YES.
( overlapping dialogue )
Brazelton:
THE SCHOOL HAS BEEN
A GREAT SUCCESS.
Amaker:
ORDINARILY, THE GIRLS
ARE ALLOWED
TO STAY FOR 18 MONTHS.
I CAN'T BEGIN TO COUNT
THE NUMBER OF TIMES
AND THE NUMBER
OF GIRLS
WHO HAVE LITERALLY
BEGGED US TO BE ALLOWED
TO STAY HERE
FOR MORE THAN
THE 18 MONTHS.
Brazelton:
THESE GIRLS HAVE DREAMS
LIKE ANY OTHER
HIGH SCHOOL TEEN,
SOMETHING EVERY SCHOOL
SHOULD ENCOURAGE.
Jiselle:
AND I DO SEE MYSELF
TRYING TO ACCOMPLISH
SOMETHING.
I WANT TO WAKE UP
EVERY DAY,
AND WAKE UP TO SOMETHING
I LOVE DOING.
I WANT TO BE A DOCTOR.
I KNOW I GOTTA GET GOOD GRADES
IN ORDER TO GET MYSELF
INTO A COLLEGE,
TO START PREPARING MYSELF
TO BECOME A DOCTOR.
Brazelton:
A LOVE OF LEARNING,
A LOVE OF CHILDREN,
A LOVE OF LIFE.
I WANT TO WAKE UP
TO SOMETHING I LOVE.
TO THE PASSION I HAVE.
Brazelton:
NEXT, WE TALK TO PARENTS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
Woman:
WE'VE SOLD OUT.
WE HAVE OVER 900 PEOPLE...
Brazelton:
EACH YEAR WE TRAVEL
ALL OVER AMERICA...
Man:
OUR COMMUNITY IS
SO EXCITED ABOUT THIS.
Brazelton:
...TO ANSWER QUESTIONS
FROM THOUSANDS OF PARENTS.
Emcee:
I'D LIKE TO WELCOME
DR. T. BERRY BRAZELTON.
Brazelton:
HERE ARE SOME OF THEM.
HOW YOU DOIN'?
I HAD A QUESTION
ABOUT CONNECTING
AND BONDING.
YOU HAD TOUCHED UPON THE FACT
THAT FATHERS DEVELOP A BOND
WITH THE CHILDREN.
THEY'RE ALWAYS
PLAYING WITH THEM.
- WHEN THEY SEE THE FATHER,
THEY GET EXCITED AND HAPPY.
- ISN'T THAT FUN?
- YEAH, IT'S FUN.
- ( all laughing )
- YOU LOOK LIKE
YOU ENJOY IT, TOO.
- I HAVE A GOOD TIME.
I'LL BET THAT BOY
SURE ENJOYS IT.
IS IT A BOY?
YEAH, TWO BOYS.
I'M A FATHER OF TWO.
SAY, FOR INSTANCE,
THERE WAS A SITUATION WHERE
A MOTHER
HAD TO BE ABSENT
AND THE FATHER WAS
REALLY THE ONLY ONE
THAT HAD TO TAKE OVER
THE ROLE NOW,
WOULD A CHILD BE ABLE
TO SWITCH FROM
ALWAYS EXPECTING
TO PLAY AND BE HAPPY
AND EXPECTING THE FUN--
TO SEE YOU IN ANOTHER WAY?
ARE YOU A SINGLE PARENT?
- YES.
- GOOD FOR YOU.
I WAS WONDERING,
WOULD A BABY BE
ABLE TO ADJUST
- TO THE NEW BOND
WITH THE FATHER?
- YEAH.
WHAT KIND OF EFFECTS
WOULD IT HAVE ON THE CHILD
TO LOSE THE BOND
WITH THE MOTHER?
WELL, IT HAS SOME
PRETTY POWERFUL EFFECTS,
TO LOSE YOUR MOTHER.
AND YOU ALWAYS WONDER,
"IF I'VE LOST ONE PARENT,
WILL I LOSE THE OTHER?"
SO YOU SHOULD BE
PREPARED ALL THE TIME
FOR THEM TO BRING UP
QUESTIONS--
"ARE YOU GOING OFF
TO LEAVE ME?"
AND IF YOU GO OFF TO WORK,
"ARE YOU COMING BACK?"
AND RATHER THAN
GETTING EXASPERATED
WITH THAT QUESTION,
REALIZE THAT THEY NEED IT
TO REASSURE THEMSELVES
THAT YOU CARE
DEEPLY ABOUT THEM.
AND WHEN YOU GET A CHANCE,
I'D EVEN SAY THAT
ABOUT THEIR MOMMY--
"SHE'S GONE OFF,
AND WE DON'T KNOW
WHERE SHE IS,
BUT I'LL BET SHE MISSES
YOU LIKE EVERYTHING."
SO, YOU KNOW, GIVE THEM
BACK THAT FEELING
THEY'RE SURROUNDED
BY PEOPLE
WHO CARE ABOUT THEM,
AND THEY ARE.
LOOK AT THE WAY
YOU TALK ABOUT 'EM.
AND I LOVE THE SENSITIVITY
OF YOUR QUESTION.
SURE, THEY WILL.
THEY'LL FIND NOT ONLY
THEY PLAY WITH YOU,
WHICH YOU ENJOY
AND THEY ENJOY,
BUT THEY'LL ALSO FIND
THE OTHER SIDE OF YOU,
THE NURTURING SIDE,
AND THEY'LL PLAY ON IT.
AND THEY'LL WANT YOU
TO CUDDLE 'EM,
AND WANT YOU TO SING
TO 'EM AT NIGHT,
OR READ TO 'EM AT NIGHT.
AND I WOULD
GIVE IN TO THAT
AND BE AS NURTURING
AS YOU CAN.
I DON'T KNOW WHETHER
IT MAKES YOU FEEL
UNCOMFORTABLE OR NOT
WHEN YOU HAVE TO
BE LIKE THAT.  GOOD.
ANOTHER THING WAS THAT
YOU HAD TALKED ABOUT ROLES
OF A FATHER AND A MOTHER,
AND THE WAY THE FATHER
HAS TO COME UP AND SHOW
THE CHILD THE WORLD.
CAN A FATHER SWITCH
ROLES AND RAISE
A HEALTHY, MENTALLY
AND PHYSICALLY, CHILD?
- YEAH.
- HE CAN?
IT'S FASCINATING
TO ME THAT A CHILD
IN A SINGLE-PARENT FAMILY
WILL LOOK FOR
TWO SEPARATE ROLES
IN THE PARENT,
AND IF THEY DON'T FIND
ENOUGH OF THAT ROLE,
THEY'LL LOOK OUTSIDE
AND SHOW SOME HUNGER.
AS LONG AS YOU DON'T FEEL
UNCOMFORTABLE ABOUT
DOING IT WITH THEM,
THEY'RE LUCKY,
LUCKY KIDS.
SO KEEP IT UP.
I'LL BET HE LOOKS TO YOU
FOR WAYS TO MASTER THINGS
ANYWAY, DOESN'T HE?
- YEAH.
- THAT'S WONDERFUL.
- DOESN'T THAT MAKE
YOU FEEL GOOD?
- IT MAKES ME FEEL GOOD.
I DON'T LIKE TO KEEP
TOUCHING ON THE SIDE
THAT I'M VERY SENSITIVE
BECAUSE IT KIND OF
FEELS WEIRD WHEN YOU SAY,
- "THIS MAN IS
VERY SENSITIVE."
- ( audience laughs )
Brazelton: DO YOU FEEL LIKE
YOU'RE TAKING A MOTHER'S
ROLE AWAY FROM HER?
- YEAH, SOMETIMES.
- DO YOU?
YOU KNOW, TO ME
THAT'S THE PASSION
OF WANTING TO GIVE
THIS LITTLE BOY
EVERYTHING YOU CAN.
THAT IS SO GREAT.
AND HE'S LEARNING
NURTURING FROM YOU
AS WELL AS LEARNING
HOW TO BE A MAN.
IT COULDN'T BE BETTER.
I GUESS THE NURTURING PART
COMES FROM THE ABSENCE
OF MY FATHER.
SO KNOWING WHAT I NEEDED
IS WHAT I GIVE TO HIM NOW.
SO YOU'RE REALLY
DOING EVERYTHING YOU CAN
FOR THIS KID, AREN'T YOU?
I'M TRYING TO.
GREAT.
I REALLY ADMIRE YOU.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
HI.  MY NAME'S DANIELE.
I'M CONCERNED IF THERE'S
ANY LONG-TERM EFFECTS
IF WE MOVE AROUND A LOT,
MOVED A LOT, LIKE,
FROM PLACE TO PLACE
SINCE THE CHILD
WAS BORN.
SHE'S EIGHT MONTHS OLD NOW.
ARE YOU A SINGLE MOTHER?
- NO.
- NO?
WELL, WHY ARE YOU
MOVING AROUND?
WELL, I LIVE
WITH A BOYFRIEND,
BUT WE'RE NOT MARRIED.
WE LIVE WITH HIS FAMILY.
IS IT A STABLE SITUATION
BETWEEN YOU?
- NOT SO SURE?
- NOT REALLY.
SO YOU'RE WORRIED ABOUT
THAT, TOO, AREN'T YOU?
YEAH.  I'M JUST CONCERNED
IF THERE'S ANYTHING THAT--
IS SHE GOING
TO BE INSECURE?
IS THERE ANYTHING THAT CAN
AFFECT HER DOWN THE ROAD
IF SHE DOESN'T HAVE...
THAT STABLE
LIVING ENVIRONMENT
IF WE CONTINUE TO MOVE
FROM PLACE TO PLACE?
WELL, SURE.
THAT'S A STRESS ON HER
AND, OF COURSE,
IT IS ON YOU, TOO,
'CAUSE IT'S MORE
OF A STRESS ON YOU.
I CAN FEEL YOUR EMOTION
AS YOU TALK ABOUT IT.
SO I DON'T THINK
YOU'RE HAVING
A VERY EASY TIME WITH IT
EITHER, ARE YOU?
- IT'S DIFFICULT.
- MM-HMM.
I'M BASICALLY MORE CONCERNED
ABOUT THE MOVING AROUND
AND NOT HAVING
ANYTHING STABLE,
IF THAT'S GONNA
AFFECT HER.
I DON'T THINK IT'S THE HOME
THAT'S THE STABILITY.
I THINK IT'S
THE RELATIONSHIPS THAT IS.
SO THE MORE SECURE
YOUR RELATIONSHIP
WITH HER IS,
AND HIS RELATIONSHIP
WITH HER,
AND EVEN HIS FAMILY'S
RELATIONSHIP--
- YOUR FAMILY
IS NOT NEARBY?
- NO.
AND YOU MISS 'EM?
THEY DON'T LIVE
THAT FAR AWAY, BUT WE'RE
JUST NOT THAT CLOSE.
Brazelton:
AND YOU WISH
THAT YOU WERE.
THIS IS WHAT A BABY
CALLS UP IN YOU, ISN'T IT?
THAT YOU WISH YOU COULD GET
BACK TO YOUR OWN PARENTS
AND GET THEM
TO NURTURE YOU.
IT'S REALLY HARD
WHEN YOU CAN'T,
AND THIS IS WHAT YOU'RE
MISSING, ISN'T IT?
MM-HMM.
BUT YOU KNOW
WHO'S THE MOST IMPORTANT
TO THAT BABY?
YOU.
AND THE WAY
YOUR FACE LIGHTS UP,
AND THE WAY YOU, YOU KNOW,
ARE SO CONCERNED ABOUT HER,
I KNOW SHE'S GOT
MONEY IN THE BANK.
SHE'S A LUCKY
LITTLE GIRL.
- THANKS.
- YOU DON'T LOOK
LIKE YOU BELIEVE IT.
I DO.
SO THERE ISN'T, LIKE,
MUCH SERIOUS LONG-TERM
EFFECTS WITH--
AS LONG AS HER FAMILY--
AS LONG AS WE'RE
CLOSE TO HER
AND SHE'S
WELL TAKEN CARE OF,
EVERYTHING'S
PRETTY MUCH OKAY?
WELL, THE FIRST FEW YEARS
ARE THE MOST CRITICAL.
AND THE MORE YOU CAN
SURROUND HER WITH PEOPLE
WHO CARE ABOUT HER--
AND LET THEM
LET HER KNOW IT--
THE SURER SHE'LL BE,
AND WHATEVER
SORT OF BUFFETING
SHE HAS TO GO
THROUGH LATER,
SHE'LL BE
READIER FOR IT.
OKAY.  THANK YOU.
Brazelton:
FOR TAPES AND
TRANSCRIPTS, CALL:
OR LOG ON AT:
ON PARENTING,"
PRESENTED BY THE PARENTING
INSTITUTE AT PAMPERS.COM.
YOU KNOW,
THE OLD SAYING IS
"CHILDREN RAISING CHILDREN,"
AND IN SOME RESPECTS
THAT'S TRUE.
BUT I HOPE YOU'VE SEEN THAT,
GIVEN A CHANCE,
THESE YOUNG PEOPLE
CAN TURN OUT TO BE
WONDERFUL PARENTS,
AND THEIR CHILDREN,
WONDERFUL KIDS.
IT'S UP TO US NOT TO LABEL
THEM WITH OUR BIASES
BUT TO UNDERSTAND THEM
AND HELP THEM
BY OFFERING THEM
AND THEIR CHILDREN
THE SUPPORT THEY NEED
TO SUCCEED.
( theme music playing )